               The Shostakovich Opus 87 Home Page

                  www.GeoCities.com/Vienna/5619

                By Jose Oscar de Almeida Marques
                     marques@newsguy.com


Arrangements

 This section isn't for the purist, so skip it if you can't stand
 the idea of hearing these pieces  in other guises than the black
 and white piano originals.  These  arrangements  came  up  as  a
 by-product  of  the sequencing of the "straight" versions, but I
 am too much in love with them  to just let them lie forgotten on
 my hard disk.  Anyway, get these at your own risk  and  keep  in
 mind  that  Shostakovich  isn't  the  least  bit responsible for
 them...

     Fugue04.mid

     The E minor Fugue is a  double fugue in the traditional cut;
     the first subject is presented in the first (slow)  section,
     the (faster) second section takes care of the second subject
     and  both  subjects are combined in the concluding part.  It
     is natural to attribute each subject and associated thematic
     material to a different instrumental  group, and this is how
     strings and brass  help  to  aurally  clarify  the  dazzling
     contrapuntal  texture  of  such  passages  in  which the two
     subjects are combined with each other and with themselves in
     a very close stretto.

     Fugue06.mid

     Am I the only one to  hear  in the B minor Fugue echoes from
     the elaborate polyphonic  canzoni  of  Andrea  and  Giovanni
     Gabrieli?  I set it for brass ensemble and all the parts are
     doubled  with a delay of some tenths of second, to reproduce
     the ambience of a cathedral in Venice.

     Fugue11.mid

     This is a transcription  of  the  B major Fugue for woodwind
     trio:  flute, English horn and  bassoon.   This  lively  and
     extrovert  piece  is  very  well  suited,  I believe, to the
     woodwind trio idiom.  Now  I  wonder  if human players could
     actually play this five-sharp piece as fast as it  is  heard
     here...

     Fugue12.mid

     The G sharp minor Fugue is a rhythmically very complex piece
     in 5/4 meter, and from the beginning I wondered how it would
     sound played by a jazz ensemble.  I added to it a drum track
     (which  I  ripped off from a "Take Five" MIDI) and the final
     result  got   some   favorable   comments   from  people  in
     alt.fan.shostakovich  and  elsewhere.   For  all  its  jazzy
     character, this "Take Five Fugue" is an exact  transcription
     of the piano piece, except for the addition of drums and the
     fact  that  the  bass  plays  one  octave  lower than in the
     original.

     Fugue13.mid

     The only five-voice fugue  in  the collection appears as the
     natural candidate for a woodwind quintet  transcription.   A
     restrained  and meditative Adagio, it displays some luminous
     entries of  the  subject,  which  the different instrumental
     timbres put on a whole new  light.   The  medium  proved  so
     adequate to the music that I didn't hesitate to transpose it
     one  diminished  fourth upwards to B flat so  that  it would
     better fit the registers and capabilities of the instruments.
     [Thanks to  Francis Markey for suggesting this key instead of
     my former choice of A Major.]

     Fugue14.mid

     I chose the string orchestra  for  this arrangement of the E
     flat minor Fugue, but added a trio of  woodwind  instruments
     that  pick  up  the  subject  and  counter-subject  at  some
     structurally significant passages.  In this I was influenced
     by   Hermann   Scherchen's   impressive  instrumentation  of
     Contrapunctus IX from J.S. Bach's Art of the Fugue.

     Prel16.mid

     When I sequenced the original Prelude I was attracted by the
     clever way the different layers  of the musical texture were
     compressed on the two piano staves.  I separated the  layers
     to   get   a   better  grasp  of  the  structure,  and  this
     instrumental arrangement came  as  a natural consequence.  A
     short  and  pungent  theme,  with  a  very  Shostakovitchian
     harmonic twist, is followed by three Baroque variations  and
     a  conclusion.   More  than  just  an analytical study, this
     arrangement came off as a  quite enjoyable piece of music as
     well.

     Prel22.mid

     Admittedly I went a bit over the top in the  arrangement  of
     the  G  minor  Prelude.  But for all the liberties I took in
     relation to the parsing and  distribution of the voices, and
     the many instrument changes, all the notes are exactly those
     written by Shostakovich.  I tried to reinforce the  hypnotic
     character  of  the long ostinati, and didn't neglect the use
     of "electronic" instruments to get the desired effect.

     Fugue22.mid

     The four voices of the  G  minor  Fugue fit so perfectly the
     register of the string quartet instruments that I can't help
     believing that Shostakovich had this ensemble in  mind  when
     he devised this piece.  Here I chose again the warm and full
     sound  of the string orchestra as the ideal vehicle for this
     music.  The transcription  is  once  more exact, with basses
     doubling the cellos one octave lower at some key points.
